---
title: "Tools - the crux of humanity"
date: 2024-12-26
---
I have always been fascinated by the relationship between Humans and their Tools. I was searching for a definition, one that captures all the elements of a Tool. I found a few - one, simple and compact, “… a tool is an object used for a set purpose.” While compact and correct, it was too general and missing the more romantic elements that I liked. So I searched a little more. I found this one, that was more like it, “… a tool is an object that extends an individual’s ability to modify features of his surrounding environment and help them achieve a task.” Modify features of his surrounding environment. That is general enough for me to work with. By god, environment can mean so many things it’s that its almost the same as the first definition. The stark difference however, is that focus on tools as a direct extension of Man. I like that a lot. 

You see, I am trying to drive a narrative of a recent observation I have had while going about my work. I really want to hammer home the point that tools are inherently linked with Man’s ability to reason. Without these tools, reasoning about aspects of the world is impossible. But what tools did Philosophers have that made them so different from modern scientists? I guess measurement is the major difference - of having the ability to test their hypothesis with ever-growing certainty. Hmm.

Language is a tool. The more I think about it, a lot of established and shared Knowledge is a tool. 

### History and development of tools

I am more interested in composite tools, so I am going to ignore the initial developments - of going from sharp rocks to sophisticated blades. They all seem to serve a similar purpose of chopping, cutting, digging and killing. But what I find interesting is when we think about the development of the first complex tool after that. 

I guess tools evolve as per the needs of the people. Agriculture, Weapons, Professions like Carpentry, Architecture and then of course, come the Renaissance - Scientific tools - telescopes and so on and so forth. And then comes the Wheel for transport and we have really started to run with it. Now we start seeing Inventions come in, which I will define as,

> device, process, or discovery under U.S. patent law that is new and useful, that reflects extraordinary creative ability or skill, and that makes a distinct and recognized contribution to and advancement of science.
> 

Gosh this is starting to remind me of my days in trying to automate patenting. New, useful, creative ability and a distinct and recognised contribution to the advancement of Science. And Science itself is, 

> The systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation, experimentation, and the testing of theories against the evidence obtained.
> 

Now its getting really interesting. I guess the free market, and the Industrial Revolution came hand in hand with the burst of inventions. The incentive to innovate makes a Country a leader, and everyone adopts the new Technology that is created. And there have to be means to protect and license the same and that leads us to Patents and all the protection law that comes with it. 

### Relation with Society and Culture

The effect of tools on society is very well known.

### Modern Tools and Technology

Tools are made to have a set purpose. But what happens when our tools become more than their objectives. I like to think of cellphone as a good example. What began as a way to communicate has turned it to something we can’t even put a lid on. 

Mobile devices aka telephones were made with the intent of communication. To pass information over great lengths (seemingly) instantly. Where in the past, it may take years for messages to be passed, we can now talk face to face with people in different countries. This is extraordinary. But with the growth of technology, come its grown capabilities. The modern mobile device, is much more than just instant communication, packaged within it is an entire virtual world. The internet allows the free flow of information, that anyone on the network can access. Discovering new people, and maintaining a virtual life that displays the reality you wish the project, and the way to meet people without meeting them. Discovering jobs, potential employees, growing your network - everything has changed with the advent of the internet. We can order food and products right to our doorstep. But are all of these advances necessarily good, or even needed? What seperates good from bad?

In a Capitalistic society, incentives are given to inventors who can solve the problems of people and sell the solution for a price that fits the market. However, there is no natural concept of morality within the free market. What emerges is just a need of the people, whether that be weapons for extremist organisations, or easy clean vaccum cleaners. A need is filled instantly.  Should the free market be regulated? Is economic progress all there is to human development? It is hard to say. What can be said is that there is no stable idea of control in such a system, and each perturbation affects everyone, linked through the market. My fear is based on a situation when we are at the mercy of this market, and how we aim to control it, and who is disproportionaly affected by it. If the rich can take advantage of it, and the poor cannot - is it not inherently unfair?

 

In conclusion, science and the growing crafts and needs of the people give rise to more sophisticated tools. As their number increase, there are acknowledgable leaps - such as the Internet, or the mobile device or AI. Similarly, in research - there are tools, methodologies used by the minority that help them move forward. Tools are integral to Humanity.
